Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Peripheral blood gene expression: it all boils
down to the RNA collection tubes
Andreas Menke, Monika Rex-Haffner, Torsten Klengel, Elisabeth B Binder and Divya Mehta*

Abstract
Background: Gene expression profiling from peripheral blood is a valuable tool for biomarker discovery in clinical
studies. Different whole blood RNA collection and processing methods are highly variable and might confound
comparisons of results across studies. The main aim of the study was to compare genome-wide gene expression
profiles obtained from the two widely used commercially available whole blood RNA collection systems PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes. Comparisons of present call rates, variances, correlations and influence of globin
reduction across the two collection systems was performed using in vivo glucocorticoid stimulation in 24
peripheral blood samples from three individuals.
Results: RNA quality, yield and numbers of detected transcripts from the two RNA collection systems was
comparable, with no significant differences between the tube types. Globin reduction resulted in a significant
increase in present call rates (p = 8.17 × 10-5 and p = 1.95 × 10-3 in PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes respectively)
and significant decrease in gene expression variance in both RNA collection tubes (p = 0.0025 and p = 0.041 in
PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes respectively). Comparisons of glucocorticoid receptor-stimulated gene expression
profiles between the two collection tube systems revealed an overlap of only 17 to 54%, depending on the
stringency level of the statistical thresholds. This overlap increased by 1-8% when the RNA samples were processed
to remove the globin mRNA.
Conclusion: RNA obtained from PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes was comparable in terms of quality and yield,
however, detectable gene expression changes after glucocorticoid receptor stimulation were distinct, with an
overlap of only up to 46% between the two collection systems. This overlap increased to 54% when the samples
were depleted of globin mRNA and drastically reduced to 17-18% when only gene expression differences with a
fold change greater than 2.0 were assessed. These results indicate that gene expression profiles obtained from
PAXgene™ and Tempus™ differ drastically and should not be analyzed together. These data suggest that
researchers must exert caution while interpreting expression profiles obtained through different RNA collection
tubes.

Background
Microarray gene expression profiling is a frequently
used approach to identify susceptibility genes or biomarkers for a number of human diseases. Peripheral blood
represents a target tissue not only for blood-borne diseases, but it is also an attractive surrogate tissue for
other diseases, given that peripheral blood cells share
more than 80% of the transcriptome with many tissues
ranging from brain, colon, heart, kidney, lung, prostate
to spleen and stomach [1]. Whole blood is a valuable
* Correspondence: mehta@mpipsykl.mpg.de
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstr. 10, D-80804 Munich,
Germany

resource which is easily obtainable and from which
RNA can be prepared economically with standardized
extraction protocols. Genome-wide expression profiling
of human blood samples however, faces numerous challenges. Robust detection of transcript levels and high
reproducibility in conjunction with minimal experimental variance is essential to enable detection of true biological variance. While standardization of blood sample
handling and processing procedures is essential for better comparisons of gene expression results across
experiments, very few studies have investigated the
influence of sample collection and its impact on whole
blood transcriptome analysis.

© 2011 Menke et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

Two commercial systems are available for collection and
immediate stabilization of peripheral blood RNA: the PAXgene™ Blood RNA Systems (PreAnalytiX) and Tempus™
Blood RNA Tubes (Applied Biosystems). These RNA collection systems use proprietary reagents which lyse blood
cells immediately after collection in the tubes, stabilize the
RNA and prevent induction of new transcripts. In addition
to different RNA collection methods, there is also a current
debate whether high amounts of globin mRNA, originating
from immature reticulocytes reduces the sensitivity to
detect differently expressed genes and subsequently
adversely impact gene expression profiling using microarrays [2]. While globin reduction appeared to be beneficial
in terms of decreased variability in gene expression profiles
and detection of small differences using Affymetrix arrays
[3], no increased sensitivity in the detection of transcriptional changes was observed using the Applied Biosystems
Microarray System [4]. A technical note also suggests no
benefits of globin reduction when using Illumina BeadChip
expression microarrays [5]. Finally, RNA processing
approaches in combination with globin reduction may produce distinct gene expression signatures which might not
be directly comparable to expression profile from RNA
without globin reduction [4,6].
To address the concerns about the reproducibility and
robustness of peripheral blood RNA collection systems,
we compared gene expression profiles from RNA samples collected in PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes using
Illumina BeadChips microarrays. Since peripheral blood
gene expression is known to be influenced by various
factors including age, gender, subset of leucocytes, body
mass index, and smoking, all of which increase the biological variability, we performed an in vivo challenge
test to override or at least reduce these confounding factors. In previous studies glucocorticoids have been
shown to induce up- or down-regulation of 100-1,000
genes in a cell-type specific way [7] hence we used dexamethasone, a synthetic cortisol analogon, selective for
the glucocorticoid receptor, to stimulate gene expression
levels. The in vivo challenge test enabled comparisons
between glucocorticoid receptor stimulated changes
across the two different RNA processing methods.

Results
RNA yield and quality comparisons between PAXgene™
and Tempus™ tubes

Differences between the two RNA collection systems were
assessed at the level of total RNA yield, RNA quality measured by the spectrophotometer ratio and the RNA Integrity Number (RIN) was assessed using an Agilent 2,100
Bioanalyzer [8]. High quality RNA was obtained from both
PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes with average 260/280
ratios of 2.1 and an average RIN of 8.7 for PAXgene™ and
8.2 for Tempus™ tubes. Following globin reduction, there

Page 2 of 8

was a significant reduction in the RIN in both tubes (PAXgene™ average RIN - 8.2, p-value: 4.9 × 10-03 and Tempus™ average RIN - 7.1, p-value: 4.0 × 10-05). The total
RNA yield obtained from the PAXgene™ samples was significantly lower than that obtained with Tempus™ tubes
(2.04 μg/ml blood ± 0.76 versus 2.98 ± 0.91 μg/ml, p =
0.022). Globin reduction led to a loss of 47.3 ± 14.7% in
PAXgene™ tubes and of 27.0% ± 7.8% of the RNA in
Tempus™ tubes.
Comparisons of baseline RNA expression between
PAXgene™ and tempus™ tubes
Without globin reduction

The number of significantly detected transcripts was
determined using the Illumina probe detection threshold
of p ≤ 0.01 in all samples within the group. There were no
significant differences in the present call rates between the
two RNA collection systems (p = 0.158). Overall, the
mean number of transcripts detected above this threshold
in PAXgene™ tubes was 8870 ± 197 and in Tempus™
tubes was 9265 ± 143. The average Pearson correlation
between expression levels from the two systems was 0.94.
No significant difference in the mean variance between
expression profiles obtained from the PAXgene™ (3.03)
versus Tempus™ (3.12) tubes was observed (p = 0.090).
Baseline differences for two transcripts, TOMM7 and
RAB37, whose expression levels were significantly different
between the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes were validated using qPCR (Additional file 1: Figure S1).
After globin reduction

After globin-reduction, a significant increase in the number of probes with expression signals above detection
threshold was observed in both PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes (Average number of significant detected
genes in PAXgene™ tubes and Tempus™: pre-globin
reduction - 9762 ± 972 and 9918 ± 482, post-globin
reduction - 11480 ± 401 and 11608 ± 247, p = 8.17 × 105
and p = 1.95 × 10 -3 in PAXgene™ and Tempus™
tubes, respectively). An average correlation of R = 0.97
was observed for the 7,578 transcripts significantly
detected in the pre- versus post-globin reduced samples.
In accordance with previous reports [6,9], globin reduction resulted in a significant reduction in the variance
(PAXgene™ tubes: mean variance of pre-globin reduced
samples - 3.20, mean variance of post-globin reduced
samples - 2.89, p = 0.0025 and Tempus™ tubes: mean
variance of pre-globin reduced samples - 3.21, mean variance of post-globin reduced samples - 2.94, p = 0.041).
Comparison of PAXgene™ RNA and tempus™ collection
systems in combination with globin reduction on
dexamethasone stimulated gene expression profiles

After dexamethasone challenge 11107 ± 930 transcripts
were detected in PAXgene™ samples and 10135 ± 1500

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

Page 3 of 8

in Tempus™ specimens before globin reduction, with
no significant increase in the present call rates (p =
0.25). To test the reproducibility between expression
profiles obtained from the PAXgene™ and Tempus™
tubes, linear regression models were used to analyze
transcripts that were differentially regulated after dexamethasone stimulation in the pre-globin depleted samples. To avoid a bias due to different detection rates
between the two systems both before and after globin
reduction and to ensure analysis of only robustly
expressed transcripts, we analyzed 8,263 probes which
were significantly detected in all 24 samples. Two arbitrary thresholds of statistical significance were set to
determine which transcripts were significantly regulated
after dexamethasone intake: adjusted p ≤ 0.05 and fold
change of ≥ ± 1.5 and adjusted p ≤ 0.01 and fold change
of ≥ ± 2.0. At adjusted p ≤ 0.05, 449 transcripts and 365
transcripts were significantly regulated with fold changes
of ≥ ± 1.5 after dexamethasone stimulation in the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes, respectively (Figure 1). An
overlap of 100 transcripts between the two systems corresponding to a 46% overlap was observed. At adjusted
p ≤ 0.01, 31 transcripts and 18 transcripts were significantly regulated with fold changes of ≥ ± 2.0 after dexamethasone stimulation in the PAXgene™ and

Ă

Adjusted p чϬ͘ϬϱĂŶĚ
ĨŽůĚĐŚĂŶŐĞш± ϭ͘ϱ
PAXTM

TempusTM

Tempus™ tubes respectively (Figure 1). An overlap of 7
transcripts between the two systems corresponding to a
17% overlap was observed.
Since comparisons between the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes might be confounded by varying amounts
of globin mRNA, the analysis was repeated using the
globin depleted samples. Overall, there was no significant difference in the number of significant dexamethasone regulated genes after globin reduction in the
PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes (p = 0.996). In the globin-depleted samples, 550 transcripts and 232 transcripts were significantly regulated after dexamethasone
stimulation at adjusted p ≤ 0.05 and 35 transcripts and
18 transcripts were significantly regulated after dexamethasone stimulation in the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes, respectively at adjusted p ≤ 0.01 (Figure 1).
An overlap of 114 transcripts between the two systems
corresponding to a 56% overlap was observed at
adjusted p ≤ 0.05 and an overlap of 8 transcripts corresponding to a 18% overlap was seen at adjusted p ≤ 0.01
(Figure 1).
For FKBP5 and IL18R1, we validated the results using
qPCR to demonstrate the technical reliability of these
data. The average correlation of the delta Ct against the
normalized microarray expression levels for FKBP5 was

b

Adjusted p чϬ͘ϬϭĂŶĚ
ĨŽůĚĐŚĂŶŐĞш± Ϯ͘Ϭ
PAXTM

TempusTM
17%

46%

70
55
63

46

116

54

83

60

239

9

7
2

8

0

7

8

20

18%

ϱϰй
'ůŽďŝŶ- reduced
TempusTM

17

'ůŽďŝŶ- reduced
PAXTM

'ůŽďŝŶ- reduced
TempusTM

'ůŽďŝŶ- reduced
PAXTM

Figure 1 Venn diagram comparing PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tube gene expression: Comparisons based on dexamethasone
stimulated gene expression before and after globin-reducing the RNA. Differentially regulated genes withstanding correction for multiple
testing are shown. In red are the percentages of overlap between the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes. a) Comparisons using the less stringent
statistical filter of adjusted p < 0.05 and fold change of ≥ ± 1.5. b) Comparisons using the more stringent statistical filter of adjusted p < 0.01
and fold change of ≥ ± 2.0.

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

0.914 (p = 4.15e-07) and that for IL18R1 was 0.834 (p =
4.38e-03). Using qPCR, we observed a significant up regulation (p < 0.05) of both FKBP5 and IL18R1 following
dexamethasone stimulation in all conditions (PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes both with and without globin reduction) and as suggested by the high correlations
coefficients, the qPCR fold changes for all conditions
were highly comparable with those obtained by microarray. For instance for Tempus™ tubes the mean fold
change [standard error of mean] and p-value for FKBP5
were as follows - microarrays before globin reduction:
5.53, p = 0.022 and qPCR before globin reduction: 5.82
[± 1.13], p = 0.045; microarrays after globin reduction:
5.92, p = 0.032 and qPCR after globin reduction: 6.12 [±
0.33], p = 0.030.
Preliminary pathway enrichment analysis was performed using Wikipathways (http://bioinfo.vanderbilt.
edu/webgestalt/) to identify pathways which were significantly over-represented in the PAXgene™ versus Tempus™ tubes after Bonferroni corrections for multiple
testing. Among the 54 transcripts which were significantly induced by dexamethasone stimulation under all
conditions (at adjusted p ≤ 0.05 and fold change of ≥ ±
1.5), there was a significant over-representation of the
Toll receptor, adipogenesis, T-cell receptor, IL-7 and IL2 pathways, which have previously reported to be glucocorticoid sensitive pathways [10]. In addition, there was
a selective enrichment of DNA damage response and
cell cycle pathways in Tempus™ tubes only, while
Translation factors, pentose phosphate, TGF-beta receptor and Hedgehog signal-ling pathways were enriched in
PAXgene™ tubes only.

Discussion
To assess whether PAXgene™ and Tempus™ peripheral
blood RNA collection tubes provide comparable gene
expression profiles, we performed an in vivo challenge
test with glucocorticoids in healthy volunteers to assess
dynamic changes in gene expression profiles.
The PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes were highly
comparable in terms of RNA quality although consistent
with previous studies, the RNA yield from PAXgene™
tubes was significantly lower [11]. No significant differences in the detection rates between the two RNA collection systems were observed. Expression profiles from
the two tube types showed a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.94, a value much lower than the usual Pearson
correlation of 0.98-99 which is often observed for replicates [12]. The mean variance in transcriptional levels
obtained from Tempus™ tubes was higher than the variance in PAXgene™ tubes but this difference was not
statistically significant. The finding that globin reduction
significantly increased the sensitivity and significantly
reduced the overall variance in gene expression profiles

Page 4 of 8

from both tubes was in line with previous studies
reporting the positive impact of globin reduction on
whole blood gene expression [6,9].
Comparisons of the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes
were performed using in vivo dexamethasone stimulation as a tool to assess the comparability of dynamic
within- subject changes in gene expression between the
two collection systems. Since setting the threshold of
significance for statistical tests is an arbitrary measure,
we set two thresholds which differed in the level of
stringency. The threshold level of adjusted p < 0.05 and
fold change of ≥ ± 1.5 was a less stringent filter but
probably closer to the threshold used in most microarray studies where usually only nominal fold changes are
expected. The more stringent threshold of adjusted p <
0.01 and fold change of ≥ ± 2.0 were chosen to select
for highly robust changes in gene expression levels and
to allow comparison of our results with that of Asare
and colleagues [11] who have also assessed the influence
of RNA collection systems on gene expression profiles.
Interestingly, despite using two statistical thresholds, the
expression profiles obtained from PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes did not substantially overlap, with 46%
overlap using the less stringent statistical threshold and
the overlap being reduced to only 17% using the more
stringent statistical threshold. Furthermore, we observed
that the differences between the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes could not be overridden by globin-reduction of the samples. In fact, removal of globin-mRNA
did not greatly increase the sensitivity to detect dexamethasone regulated transcripts. The overlap of 17%
using the more stringent criteria showed a gain in sensitivity of only 1% over the non globin reduced samples.
Of the 54 transcripts which were significantly differentially regulated after dexamethasone stimulation under
all conditions using the less stringent statistical filters
(Figure 2), there are several candidates such as FKBP5,
IL18R1, IL1R1, ECHDC3, ZBTB16, PHC2 and TLR2
which we and others have found to be robustly induced
by dexamethasone across independent datasets, thereby
serving as positive controls [13,14].
To date only two studies have compared expression
levels from RNA collected in PAXgene™ and Tempus™
tubes. Matheson et al. reported that there were no significant differences between IL-2 levels between the two
tubes which were shipped at two different temperatures
[15]. In another study, Asare and colleagues demonstrated that peripheral blood RNA isolation using the
PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes is significantly different and this critically impacts gene expression profiles
obtained from the two RNA collection systems [11]. In
this study the average overlap between the two tubes for
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) induced gene expression differences was 48% (at p < 0.01 and fold change > 2)

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

Page 5 of 8

Figure 2 Comparison of fold changes between PAXgeneTM and TempusTM tubes after dexamethasone-stimulation: Heatmap of fold
changes of 54 significantly differentially expressed transcripts after dexamethasone-stimulation in PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes.
The legend displays the colour mapping to row-wise Z-scores, which are calculated by subtracting the mean from each cell, and then dividing
the value by the standard deviation of the row. The density plot in the legend indicates that most transcripts have consistent fold changes
across the 4 groups (non-significant differences are indicated in orange). Few transcripts show significant differences in dexamethasone
induction as indicated in red and white. The histogram in the heatmap indicates the z-score scaling across the rows, with the dotted black line
indicating a z-score of 0. The transcripts are ordered according to their z-score scaling across the rows, from the non-significant z-scores around
0 on the top and the significant z-scores around 2 at the bottom.

when analyzed on the Affymetrix microarray system. In
the current study we report a sizeable difference
between the two tubes types with an overlap of only 1718% on the Illumina microarray at the same statistical
threshold. The discrepancy in the percentage of overlap
might be partly explained by differences in the experimental set-up, type of stimulus to induce gene expression, microarray platforms and statistical procedures
between the two studies.
The major disadvantage of this study is the small sample size and it would be interesting to replicate these
findings independently in a larger dataset. The advantages of the study include a robust in vivo stimulation to

detect dynamic differences in gene expression and qPCR
validation of four transcripts in triplicates to demonstrate
the technical reliability of the data. A further strength of
this study is that the reported gene expression differences
between the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes seem
robust to RNA purification methods such as globin
reduction. Also, to the best of our knowledge, this is the
only study which compares the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes in the presence of globin reduction.

Conclusions
Multicenter research studies involving collection and
storage of large numbers of peripheral blood samples

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

require a systematic approach for sample collection
which is reliable and reproducible across different
laboratories. Our results indicate that the choice of
RNA collection tubes greatly influences the transcriptional profiles obtained from peripheral blood. While
comparing transcripts differentially regulated after in
vivo dexamethasone intake, we demonstrate a mere
overlap of up to 54% between two of the most commonly used commercial systems for collection of peripheral blood RNA - PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes.
We report that only transcripts which are differentially
regulated with large, robust and significant fold changes
are detected in both PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes.
These results raise a very important question about the
strong impact of the RNA isolation tubes on transcription levels which cannot be surpassed by downstream
processes such as globin mRNA reduction and data analysis. These data suggest that combining gene expression
profiles across the PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes is
not advisable and researchers should use a single tube
type throughout the project to avoid biases due to the
RNA collection system. This study has great relevance
for large clinical studies where whole blood gene

Page 6 of 8

expression profiles are analyzed for general research
purposes and for identification of biomarkers for human
diseases.

Methods
Study design and blood collection

Three healthy male volunteers aged 30-35 years with
body mass index of 20-25 were enrolled in the study
(see Figure 3). All subjects were in good physical condition and free from medication. Leucocytes counts, Creactive protein (CRP), gamma glutamyl transpeptidase
(GGT), alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) and aspartate
aminotransferase (ASAT) levels were not significantly
elevated. The optimal time of blood collection for
mRNA measurement after dexamethasone stimulation
was defined in a pilot experiment. The tmax of orally
administered dexamethasone is about 1.5 h with a t1/2
of about 4 h [7]. In our pilot experiment, maximal gene
expression was observed 3 and 5 h after dexamethasone
intake, hence we used a 3 h interval between blood sampling. Non-stimulated peripheral blood samples were
obtained at noon after 2 h of fasting and abstention
from coffee, smoking and physical activity, followed by

Figure 3 Flow diagram of the study design: Peripheral blood was drawn from 3 healthy young male volunteers at 12:00 and 3:00 pm
using PAXgene™ and Tempus™ collection tubes. After the first blood draw at baseline, volunteers were administered 1.5 mg
dexamethasone orally and blood was collected again after 3 h. After blood collection, RNA (24 samples, 8 from each individual) was extracted
using standard protocols and later processed either with or without globin reduction. Blood from 2 PAXgene™ tubes was pooled together to
obtain enough RNA for the amplifications and the globin reduction procedure.

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

orally administration of 1.5 mg dexamethasone. Stimulated peripheral blood samples were drawn 3 h later.
For each sample, duplicate measures of 2.5 ml and 3 ml
blood was collected in PAXgene™ tubes (PreAnalytiX
GmbH, Hombrechtikon, Switzerland) and Tempus™
tubes (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA)
respectively. The PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes were
stored for 2.5 h at room temperature and then transferred to -20°C. Due to the lower RNA yield from the
PAXgene™ tubes, RNA from two PAXgene™ tubes was
pooled together for the experiment.
Serum, EDTA and Li Herapin tubes (Sarstedt AG,
Nümbrecht, Germany) were collected concurrently to
analyse differential blood counts, cortisol and ACTH
levels and liver enzymes. Administration of 1.5 mg dexamethasone p.o. resulted in a decrease in cortisol and
ACTH levels at 3 h post-intake, indicating successful
dexamethasone stimulation in all 3 volunteers.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of
the Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich, Germany, and written informed consent was obtained from
all subjects.
RNA extraction, globin reduction and amplification

Total RNA was isolated from whole blood stored in PAXgene™ and Tempus™ tubes according to the respective
manufacturer’s instructions. The PAXgene™ samples
were processed using the PAXgene™ Blood RNA Kit
based on the Quiagen method for column purification of
nucleic acids (PreAnalytiX GmbH, Hombrechtikon, Switzerland, catalogue number 762174). The Tempus™ samples were isolated using the Tempus™ Spin RNA
Isolation Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA,
catalogue number 4380204). RNA quality was assessed
using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies,
Palo Alto, CA, USA). The concentration and purity of
total RNA was independently assessed by 260/280 UV
absorption ratios, respectively (Nanophotometer, Implen,
Munich, Germany). RNA samples were divided into nonglobin reduced and globin reduced groups. The GLOBINclear™-Human Kit (Ambion, Inc., Texas, USA, catalogue
number #AM1980) was used to remove globin mRNA.
Sample amplification and labeling for both globin-reduced
and non-reduced samples was performed using the Illumina R TotalPrep RNA Amplification Kit (Ambion, Inc.,
Texas, USA, catalogue number AMIL1791).

Page 7 of 8

qPCR procedures

For validation of the results, cDNA was synthesized
from 500 ng total RNA using Superscript II Reverse
Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany). qPCR
was performed using the Universal Probe Library for
TOMM7, RAB37, FKBP5, IL18R1 and TBP on the
Roche LightCycler 480 (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany). Assays were designed using the Probe
Finder Software (Roche Applied Science) and run in triplicates in a total reaction volume of 10 μl.
Statistical analysis

Microarray expression analysis was performed in R [16],
using beadarray (providing routines to handle Illumina
BeadStudio data) [17], limma (for statistical routines)
and vsn (for normalization) [18] packages. Raw microarray scan files were exported using the Illumina Beadstudio program and loaded into R for downstream analysis.
The data were transformed and normalized using the
variance stabilizing normalization method. Of the 48804
probes present on the Human HT-12v3, probes were
selected which fulfilled the criteria of Illumina probe
detection p-value of < 0.01 in the individuals. Raw
qPCR data from the Roche LightCycler 480 System was
extracted and the crossing thresholds (C T ) from the
technical replicates were averaged across all samples.
Transcripts were normalized to housekeeping gene TBP.
Significantly regulated genes were detected using generalized linear models and corresponding fold changes
between the groups in R. For differential expression analysis, functions from the limma package [19] were used
on the normalized log2-transformed expression values
before and after dexamethasone challenge; group differences were tested for collection method, globin reduction status, and pre- vs. post dexamethasone
stimulation. Results were corrected for multiple testing
by 10,000 permutations for each transcript using the
permutation of regressor residuals test (PRR) as implemented in the R package glmperm (http://cran.r-project.
org/web/packages/glmperm/index.html). Clinical variables and RNA quality measures were compared using a
one way ANOVA with SigmaStat ® for Windows
(Release 2.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois 60606, USA).

Disclosures
Monika Rex-Haffner; Torsten Klengel; Divya Mehta:
nothing to disclose.

Processing of samples on microarrays

Biotin-labeled cRNA was hybridized to Illumina
HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips (Illumina, Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA, catalogue number BD-103-0603)
according to manufacturer’s protocols. Microarrays were
scanned with the Bead Array Reader (Illumina, Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA).

Patents
Andreas Menke, Elisabeth B. Binder - inventors:
Means and methods for diagnosing predisposition for
treatment emergent suicidal ideation (TESI). European
application number: 08016477.5. International application number: PCT/EP2009/061575.

Menke et al. BMC Research Notes 2012, 5:1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/5/1

Elisabeth B. Binder - inventor:
FKBP5: a novel target for antidepressant therapy.
International publication number: WO 2005/054500
Polymorphisms in ABCB1 associated with a lack of
clinical response to medicaments. International application number: PCT/EP2005/005194

Page 8 of 8

9.

10.

11.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. qPCR validation of TOMM7 and RAB37
baseline gene expression differences between PAXgeneTM and
TempusTM tubes: Boxplots of TOMM7 and RAB37 expression levels from
PAXgene™™ and Tempus™™ tubes are depicted. In accordance with
microarray data, both transcripts were significantly differentially expressed
between the PAXgene™™ and Tempus™™ tubes.

Abbreviations
RIN: RNA integrity number; CRP: C-reactive protein; GGT: Gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase; ALAT: Alanine aminotransferase; ASAT: Aspartate
aminotransferase.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank A. Sangl, S. Damast and S. Sauer for their
excellent technical assistance.
Elisabeth B. Binder: Current grant support from NIMH, Doris Duke Charitable
foundation, Behrens-Weise-Stiftung and PharmaNeuroBoost.
Authors’ contributions
AM, EBB and DM participated in the design of the study and drafted the
manuscript. MRH and TK performed the experiments; AM collected the
samples; DM performed the statistical analysis; All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

number for assigning integrity values to RNA measurements. BMC Mol
Biol 2006, 7:3.
Raghavachari N, Xu X, Munson PJ, Gladwin MT: Characterization of whole
blood gene expression profiles as a sequel to globin mRNA reduction in
patients with sickle cell disease. PLoS One 2009, 4(8):e6484.
Lee MJ, Gong DW, Burkey BF, Fried SK: Pathways regulated by
glucocorticoids in omental and subcutaneous human adipose tissues: a
microarray study. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2010, 300(3):E571-E580.
Asare AL, Kolchinsky SA, Gao Z, Wang R, Raddassi K, Bourcier K, SeyfertMargolis V: Differential gene expression profiles are dependent upon
method of peripheral blood collection and RNA isolation. BMC Genomics
2008, 9:474.
Illumina Technical Note. 2010 [http://www.illumina.com/Documents/
products/technotes/technote_gene_expression_data_quality_control.pdf].
Binder EB: The role of FKBP5, a co-chaperone of the glucocorticoid
receptor in the pathogenesis and therapy of affective and anxiety
disorders. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2009, 34(Supplement 1):S186-S195.
Menke A, Arloth J, Pütz B, Weber P, Klengel T, Mehta D, Gonik M, RexHaffner M, Rubel J, Uhr M, et al: Dexamethasone stimulated gene
expression in peripheral blood is a sensitive marker for glucocorticoid
receptor resistance in depressed patients. 2011.
Matheson LA, Duong TT, Rosenberg AM, Yeung RS: Assessment of sample
collection and storage methods for multicenter immunologic research in
children. J Immunol Methods 2008, 339(1):82-89.
R Development Core Team: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2007.
Dunning MJ, Smith ML, Ritchie ME, Tavare S: beadarray: R classes and
methods for Illumina bead-based data. Bioinformatics 2007,
23(16):2183-2184.
Huber W, von Heydebreck A, Sultmann H, Poustka A, Vingron M: Variance
stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the
quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics 2002, 18(Suppl 1):
S96-S104.
Smyth GK: Limma: linear models for microarray data. In Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology Solutions using R and Bioconductor. Edited by:
Gentleman R, Carey VJ, Dudoit S, Irizarry RA, Huber W. New York: Springer;
2005:397-420.

doi:10.1186/1756-0500-5-1
Cite this article as: Menke et al.: Peripheral blood gene expression: it all
boils down to the RNA collection tubes. BMC Research Notes 2012 5:1.

Received: 4 August 2011 Accepted: 4 January 2012
Published: 4 January 2012
References
1. Mehta D, Menke A, Binder EB: Gene expression studies in major
depression. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2010, 12(2):135-144.
2. Debey S, Schoenbeck U, Hellmich M, Gathof BS, Pillai R, Zander T,
Schultze JL: Comparison of different isolation techniques prior gene
expression profiling of blood derived cells: impact on physiological
responses, on overall expression and the role of different cell types.
Pharmacogenomics J 2004, 4(3):193-207.
3. Vartanian K, Slottke R, Johnstone T, Casale A, Planck SR, Choi D, Smith JR,
Rosenbaum JT, Harrington CA: Gene expression profiling of whole blood:
comparison of target preparation methods for accurate and
reproducible microarray analysis. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:2.
4. Dumeaux V, Lund E, Borresen-Dale A-L: Comparison of globin RNA
processing methods for genome-wide transcriptome analysis from
whole blood. Biomark Med 2008, 2(1):11-21.
5. Illumina Technical Note. 2007 [http://www.expressionanalysis.com/images/
uploads/tech_notes/Illumina_Blood_TechNote.pdf].
6. Liu J, Walter E, Stenger D, Thach D: Effects of globin mRNA reduction
methods on gene expression profiles from whole blood. J Mol Diagn
2006, 8(5):551-558.
7. Czock D, Keller F, Rasche FM, Haussler U: Pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of systemically administered glucocorticoids. Clin
Pharmacokinet 2005, 44(1):61-98.
8. Schroeder A, Mueller O, Stocker S, Salowsky R, Leiber M, Gassmann M,
Lightfoot S, Menzel W, Granzow M, Ragg T: The RIN: an RNA integrity

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

